WHAT I LEARNED
==============

[1] GPU COMPOSITING & COLOR POP
--------------------------------
When a CSS transform (like scale or translate) fires on an element, the browser
promotes that element to its own GPU compositor layer mid-animation. This
re-rasterization can cause a visible color flash or "glow pop" on nearby elements,
especially on saturated colors like red. This is a known Chromium issue called
the "GPU compositing color shift" or "layer promotion artifact."

Elements near the animated element (bystanders) can also flicker — when a neighbor
gets promoted to a GPU layer, surrounding elements get re-rasterized as a side effect.

FIX: "will-change: transform" pre-promotes an element to its own GPU layer before
any animation fires, preventing mid-animation re-rasterization. Apply it to the
animated element to prevent the pop on itself, or to sensitive bystanders to
insulate them from neighbor-triggered reshuffles.

COST: Every element with will-change: transform holds a permanent GPU texture,
consuming memory and battery even when idle. Avoid applying it to large lists.
For many elements, apply it dynamically on mouseenter and remove on mouseleave.

[2] STACKING TIMERS & CONCURRENT ASYNC EVENTS
----------------------------------------------
JavaScript is single-threaded — there are no real threads. But multiple
independent setTimeout timers can be running at the same time, and they
do not know about each other. This creates the same problems as multithreading:
race conditions, missed signals, and events firing in the wrong order.

In the battle system, two independent timers were racing each other:

  Timer A — Battle loop: fires BATTLE_STEP after 600ms
  Timer B — Animation clear: sets activeAnimations[id] = null after config.duration ms

Both start at the same moment when a step resolves. If an animation is longer
than 600ms (e.g. burn: 750ms, run_circle: 700ms), the battle loop fires first
and triggers a new React useEffect. That effect's cleanup function runs
`timers.forEach(clearTimeout)` — which cancels Timer B before it fires.
Result: the animation CSS class never gets cleared, and dead enemies never fade.

KEY INSIGHT: Timers stored in a local variable inside useEffect are owned by
that effect and get cancelled when the effect re-runs or unmounts. Timers stored
in a useRef are NOT cancelled by effect cleanup — they survive across re-renders
and step transitions. This is the difference between "effect-scoped" and
"persistent" timers.

FIX: Move timers that must always fire (like animation clear timers) from a
local array into a useRef. Store them the same way float timers already were:

  animClearTimersRef.current.push(setTimeout(() => {
    setActiveAnimations(prev => ({ ...prev, [id]: null }));
  }, config.duration));

Prune stale IDs from the ref at the start of each new step so they don't
accumulate across a long battle.

BROADER LESSON: When two async timers need to coordinate — one should drive
the other, not run independently. In this case, the battle loop delay was made
aware of animation durations (via battleDelay in the animation registry) so it
waits the right amount of time before advancing. This turns two racing timers
into one orchestrated sequence.

[3] SMALL ACCUMULATION BUGS THAT HIDE BEHIND USAGE PATTERNS
-------------------------------------------------------------
A tag system that merges stacks into a single growing value can produce wrong
results in ways that are very hard to notice — because the bug only surfaces
when the same mechanic is used more times than normal gameplay ever reaches.

In the SPEED_BOOST case, SpeedBoostOnApply merged each Speed Up into one tag
with a growing "amount" field. The stack count was derived with
Math.round(amount / tag.amount), which worked fine for 1 or 2 stacks.
The bug was invisible because in player gameplay Speed Up is only ever used
once per turn — never twice in a row. The math always happened to be correct
at that usage level.

Dark Fox Sumurai was the trigger: his AI uses Speed Up twice in the same turn,
which exposed the stale math. Stacks and amount got out of sync, producing
inflated speed numbers (e.g. 207 in the tooltip) that had no logical basis.

ROOT FIX: Each Speed Up application now pushes its own separate +20 entry into
the pool. SPEED_CALC sums them naturally (+20 per entry). IMBUE consumes each
one independently. No accumulation math, no derived stack count — the data
structure directly reflects reality.

BROADER LESSON: When designing a stacking system, prefer data that directly
represents state over data that is derived from other data. A list of separate
entries is easier to reason about than a single value with computed metadata.
And always test mechanics at 2-3x the normal usage depth — the player may only
ever use a card once, but an enemy AI might use it three times, and that is
where accumulation logic breaks.

RULE: Never accumulate a value that is read throughout the turn (like speed)
into a single growing tag. Speed is evaluated during SPEED_CALC for every
action — merging stacks into one amount means every subsequent read picks up
a value that was meant for only the next attack, corrupting the sort order of
unrelated actions.

Other values CAN be accumulated, but only if they are consumed entirely inside
a single action's execution bubble — damage multipliers, healing power, cost
modifiers. These are read once, applied once, and gone. They never bleed into
a separate action's calculation. Speed does not have this property, so it must
stay as separate independent entries that each action reads and discards on its
own terms.

[4] BATTLE DATA ACCESS — THE CASE FOR A CENTRALIZED BATTLE STORE
-----------------------------------------------------------------
Building the battle system revealed how many different kinds of data need to be
reached mid-execution. Three distinct layers kept appearing:

  1. Static definitions — card definitions, class definitions, scenario configs,
     animation registries. These never change during a fight.

  2. Live game state — current HP, active tags, queues, turn counters.
     These are already in the reducer and accessed through dispatch/state.

  3. Prediction / lookahead data — what will the enemy do next, what cards will
     be available after this action, how will speed rankings shift. This is the
     hardest layer: it requires reading static defs AND live state together to
     simulate a future frame.

Because these were pulled from scattered places (top-level imports, reducer
state, inline calculations inside engine functions), any logic that needed to
cross layers — like enemy AI or card effect previews — had to thread data
through function arguments manually. This creates long parameter lists and makes
it easy to miss a piece of data the engine actually needs.

WHAT COULD HAVE HELPED: A single BattleDataStore or BattleContext that holds
a snapshot of all three layers and is updated once at the start of each step.
Engine functions read from it freely without needing it passed in. Prediction
logic reads the same store and runs a dry simulation against a copy.

TRADEOFF: A global store is easy to over-read. Components start depending on
data they have no business touching, and isolated testing gets harder. The
right scope is read-only reference data + current state snapshot — mutations
still go through the reducer, not the store. The store is a lens, not a sink.

BROADER LESSON: When a system has multiple execution layers that all need to
share context, define that context structure early — even as a plain object —
and pass it through deliberately. It's much harder to retrofit later when the
engine functions, AI logic, and UI preview components have all grown their own
ad-hoc imports.

[5] REACT IS A WEB FRAMEWORK, NOT A GAME FRAMEWORK
----------------------------------------------------
React was designed for a specific problem: display server data as UI, respond
to user input, send that input back to a server. Its entire model is built
around that loop. Building a game in it means constantly working against
assumptions that are invisible until they hurt you.

WEB REACT'S ASSUMPTIONS:
  - State is a cache of server data. It changes in discrete events (a fetch
    returns, a user clicks a button). Between events, nothing happens.
  - UI is a pure function of state: UI = f(state). Re-render is cheap and
    correct — just call the function again with new data.
  - Side effects (timers, subscriptions) are exceptions that get cleaned up
    when the component unmounts or the dependency changes.
  - Components are isolated. They receive what they need via props or context
    and do not reach into each other.

GAME LOGIC'S ASSUMPTIONS:
  - State mutates continuously in a simulation loop. Many systems read and
    write shared state in a defined sequence every frame/step.
  - Timing is a first-class concern — animations, delays, and state transitions
    must coordinate with each other precisely.
  - Side effects ARE the product. The battle loop, the animation system, the
    AI — these are not exceptions to manage around, they are the entire point.
  - Systems need to reach across boundaries freely. The engine needs card
    definitions, character state, scenario config, and animation config
    simultaneously, in one execution pass.

WHERE THE MISMATCH SHOWS UP IN THIS PROJECT:
  - useEffect's cleanup model cancelled animation timers when the battle loop
    re-rendered (logged in [2]). That is React doing exactly what it is
    supposed to do — and it was wrong for a game.
  - Every piece of game data that needed to cross a component boundary had to
    be threaded through context, props, or imports — because React has no
    concept of "engine-scoped data" that lives outside the component tree.
  - The reducer (designed for discrete UI events) had to carry animation flags
    like STOP_SHAKE and STOP_FIZZLE — because there was no better place to
    coordinate state between the engine and the UI layer.
  - Prediction logic (simulating a future turn) requires running the engine
    against a copy of state — but in React, state is owned by the component
    tree, so "copying it" is not straightforward.

THE CORE INSIGHT: In a web app, state is data waiting to be displayed. In a
game, state IS the game — it runs, simulates, and evolves on its own, and the
UI is just a window into it. React's tools (useEffect, useReducer, context)
were built for the first model. Using them for the second works, but you end
up building a game engine inside a framework that does not know a game engine
is there.

WHAT THIS MEANS GOING FORWARD: The game logic (engine, AI, simulation) should
be as framework-agnostic as possible — plain functions and plain objects that
do not know about React. React's job is to read the output of that logic and
render it. The more the engine depends on React primitives (state, effects,
context), the more the two models fight each other.

BUT REACT STILL HAS REAL ADVANTAGES FOR THIS KIND OF GAME:

  1. AI tooling knows it extremely well. Claude, Copilot, and every major AI
     assistant has deep React training. For a solo or small-team project, this
     alone is a force multiplier — you get high-quality help on every problem
     instead of fighting obscure engine documentation alone.

  2. The game IS mostly UI. Avormore: Declared Tactics is a card game —
     menus, card displays, HP bars, battle logs, map screens, modals. These
     are web UI problems. React is genuinely excellent at them. A platformer
     or physics game would suffer much more from the framework mismatch.

  3. Turn-based timing fits React's model better than real-time would.
     Steps happen in seconds, not frames. React's re-render cost is invisible
     at that cadence. A 60fps action game in React would be painful;
     a 1-step-per-second card battle is manageable.

  4. CSS and Tailwind are first-class. Styling a card game UI — animations,
     hover states, layout, responsive design — is trivial compared to doing
     the same thing in a canvas-based or custom engine environment.

  5. Deployment is frictionless. It's a website. No runtime to install, no
     platform store, no build target per OS. Share a URL and it runs.

  6. Hot reload speeds up iteration. Changing a card's layout or a battle
     log style and seeing it instantly — without restarting a game loop —
     is something native game engines still don't do as smoothly.


